the Hamas run Health Ministry in Gaza
says the death toll from the war with
Israel has surpassed 19,000 but
independently verifying these numbers is
difficult with many journalists and
human rights workers having fled the T
territory and outside access severely
restricted now despite the challenges in
documenting the Dead the UN says
civilian casualties are
unprecedented just a warning our next
report contains some distressing
images counting the dead an already
gruesome job made almost impossible by
on the ground
fighting the Relentless bombardment of
Israeli forces and the sheer chaos of
War they are targeting children as you
can see that's what happened two
missiles from F-16 hitting little
children
[Music]
the human toll of the fighting is often
conveyed by Witnesses and by overwork
doctors repeated blackouts mean social
media is sometimes their only way to
give
updates no longer able to provide
surgeries at Arley Hospital the hospital
is now effectively a first aid station
hundreds of wounded now at hospital with
no access to surgery they will die from
their
wounds
an official toll of casualties is being
kept by the Palestinian Health Ministry
in
Gaza its latest update said Israel's
offensive had killed more than 19,000
Palestinians the Hamas run Ministry
doesn't differentiate between civilians
and combatants but has said that most of
those killed were women and
children thank you Secretary General for
this the United Nations has backed this
claim despite stated verification
challenges what is clear is that we have
had in a few weeks thousands of children
killed so this is what matters we are
witnessing a killing of civilians that
is unparalleled and unprecedented in any
conflict since I am Secretary
General
not yet included in the official death
toll are the thousands of people who are
missing and feared dead under the
rubble when or if they are recovered
officials in Gaza will have to figure
out where to bury
them cemeteries are either full or
inaccessible because of fighting an
unknown number of bodies has been buried
in Mass
Graves toes Paton is the project leader
at the Upsala conflict data program with
the Hamas run Gaza Health Ministry
reporting more than 19,000 Palestinian
deaths I asked her earlier how confident
we can be that this number is
accurate well the numbers reported by
the gon Ministry of Health have been
shown to be rather accurate and precise
in earlier phases of this conflict when
for example the UN has been able to uh
conduct their own investigations later
on so we have no reason to believe
believe that the ministry is not telling
the truth this time uh one should
remember that it's extremely hard to
gather real time data in the midst of
War uh communication channels are
Disturbed internet is down um so I'm not
surprised if these numbers are revised
later on both downwards could be because
of double counting but more likely
upwards when more bodies are found under
the rubble um and and people have been
buried uh hastily in Mass Graves for
example
but we have no reason to believe that
these numbers are exaggerated in any way
gazen authorities don't distinguish
between combatants and civilians when
giving these numbers but Israel
estimates that around 5,000 Hamas
militants have been killed since October
7th is it possible to verify
this uh I wouldn't say that it is at
this point as you said the health
Ministry does not distinguish between
civilians and combatants we know that a
big proportion is women and children so
we can assume that those at least are
civilians um but we cannot really trust
Israel because they on the other side
has an interest in over reporting
insurgents and Under reporting civilian
casualties so we this is just one of the
things that we have to accept that we
cannot know right now but that will
become clear as time passes and like I
said it's really hard in in real time to
get accurate data um from war zones yeah
I would like to talk about your work
right now because the upsel conflict
data program has been recording the
death toll in global conflict since
1989 how has the limited access to Gaza
made this more difficult since October
7th and you know maybe even before
that well it's definitely a problem and
mean we collect data we collect
preliminary data on a monthly basis but
we also have our yearly data which is
more um thoroughly investigated so we
are used to the situation that
information becomes clearer as time
passes and we always go back and revise
the data as well and actually Israel and
the Palestine conflict is one of the
best covered conflicts in the world
historically so this is one of the
conflict zones that we get the most
detailed information from uh in many
areas of the world it's much harder so
this is not uh a new thing it's not
unique for this uh Conflict at all but
we work a lot with different types of
sources trying to triangulate different
um types of information using social
media uh and Nos and um different news
media to to be able to get a sense of
what's going on now that you mentioned
social media this is of course also a
war of images a war of words a
propaganda war of sworts as well how
much does that complicate your
work of course it's uh really hard and
again it's not unique to this conflict
at all we always need to be aware of the
where does the information come origin
from originally and that actor has that
actor an interest in portraying this
conflict in a certain way and also with
video images we need to be really
careful it's been shown in this conflict
and in Ukraine for example and many
other conflicts as well that uh videos
that were uh released as um evidence of
something going on in the conflict was
in fact from a video game so this
information flow that we have right now
is of course we need to be cautious and
and really be careful about uh trying to
to check where the information comes
from and if we can trust that Source
thees Pon project leader at the upsot
conflict data program in OBS in Sweden
many
thanks thank you Joe Dyke is lead
investigator at air wars a nonprofit
that tracks civilian casualties and
conflicts welcome to DW the hamus Run
Health Ministry in Gaza say more than
19,000 Palestinians have died in Israeli
attacks civilians and Fighters can you
confirm that
number uh thank you first of all for
having us um no we can't confirm that
number explicitly but I think it's worth
putting in context of there are two
major Trends here one is as you said
earlier uh human rights workers
journalists Etc are not able to operate
in Gaza uh and the the context and then
International journalists have been
prevented from entering by the Egyptian
authorities and by the Israeli
authorities so you have this uh huge gap
of information and then you have uh a
dispute an unprecedented dispute over
the numbers uh and as you say uh you
know then can you confirm these numbers
is very difficult thing to do but the
night the night broadly what we can say
is so we as an organization are tracking
all allegations of Civilian harm but
every incident goes through a five or
six stage review process so it takes a
long time we've published more than 100
instance already of more than 1,600 that
we have monitored meaning that have been
uh that need to be assessed and reviewed
so it's a long slow process what we can
say is that in those hundred that we
have published and that have been
through the full uh process we're also
crosschecking them with the details that
were released by the Ministry of Health
the Palestinian Ministry of Health that
released the names of 7,000 victims
we're crosschecking them with those and
broadly we're finding that the name that
we are in we are finding in a completely
different methodology are the same as
those released by the um Palestinian
Ministry of Health or many of them are
the same so that so broadly we're
finding that those uh methodology and
those figures that have been released by
the Ministry of Health we're finding
them broadly uh uh consistent uh but we
can't say that the 19,000 would it will
just take us a long long time to do that
process in general what about the
proportion of civilians in in those
numbers yeah I I think uh again it it
will take a long time to make full
assessments but I think what we can say
is so air wars as an organization has
been tracking civilian harm in conflicts
for a decade so in Iraq Syria Yemen
Libya um Ukraine in the last year H and
one thing that we can say for certain
here is that we're seeing far more
incidents of entire families uh killed
in their homes together than we have
seen in other contexts uh that that
doesn't necess necessarily uh you know
we uh talk you about full it would take
a long time to have full assessments the
Israeli military says that it assesses
that two two civilians have been killed
for every militant it's very hard to
objectively judge that I have no idea
what methodology they reached that uh uh
conclusion um but what we can say is
that the number of cases uh of of entire
families killed in is unlike anything we
have in other conflicts uh and therefore
that indicates that you know there's
there's very large civilian harm inance
jaia for example there was an attack on
the refugee camp where we individually
monitored more than a hundred specific
civilians that were killed in that
incident again with the attack on alage
which is a a residential building in
Northern Gaza we monitor we tracked more
than a 100 civilians uh killed in that
incident as well so you're seeing huge
uh incidents in which many many
civilians are killed in one one case do
do your assessments go as far as
pinpointing uh or or or holding
accountability to you know which side is
is to blame in all of
this uh I mean so so uh they do they do
to a certain extent uh we obviously you
know that uh absolute certainty requires
people on the ground looking at
Munitions remnants and that's true
wherever you are in the world um what
ever conflict you're looking at I think
in the context of something like jabalia
or something like Al there is no ability
nobody else in the uh in this conflict
has the ability to destroy a building uh
a 12 story building in one go there's
just I mean the the Israelis even accept
that they uh carried out jabalia and
they accept that They carried out Al so
like there's not um in certain incidents
they they they accept it I think in
General it's it's very it will take a
long time to be certain on every
incident is as to whether it is a um you
know whether it could have been
Palestinian rocket fire we we in 2021
monitored all uh civilian harm from in
the war there and and we found that
around at least 151 civilians were
killed by Israeli strikes and 15 uh were
killed by Palestinian misfire so that
you know that gives you some indication
okay uh but I think it's it will take a
long time to be certain on that but I
think there's there's certainly uh an
overwhelming uh Power in the sense of
military capacity and impact is the
Israeli military forces Joe dke there
head of the investigations and
accountability unit at air wars thank
you